# Coloractal Cancer Detection
## Abstract
Colorectal Cancer, sometimes referred to as colon cancer or rectal cancer or bowel cancer, has become one of the common types of cancer throughout the world. Diagnosis for detection in the early stage is very crucial for the treatment with a higher chance of survival and recovery.  Machine Learning (ML) has shown significant performance in Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) on diverse cancer identification. In this paper, a comprehensive comparison among five Deep Convolutional Neural Network (Deep CNN) model’s (pre-trained with millions of images from ImageNet) will be done in terms of performance on detecting colorectal cancer after fine-tunning those models using Transfer Learning method. Finally, few fusion based models will be presented that outperformed other individual models with more accuracy as high as 99.33%.
## Introduction
Cancer that developed from the colon or rectum is known as Colorectal Cancer (CRC). Which is often referred to as colon/rectum/bowel cancer. Presence of blood in the stool, changed bowel movements, weight loss and fatigue are few common symptoms that indicate Colorectal Cancer. According to a study of global cancer statistics in 2018, CRC is the third most notable cancer with 6.1% of total incidence and second in terms of mortality with 9.2% worldwide. Generally, aged people with an imbalanced lifestyle tend to have colon cancer. Diet (sugar, red meat, processed meat, and alcohol), obesity, smoking, and lack of physical activity are common reasons that lead to colon cancer. Likewise other cancers, if diagnosed in an early stage, treatment procedures are less complex with higher succession rate. More than a million people get CRC yearly resulting in about 715,000 deaths as of 2010.

According to several studies, 75% to 95% CRC cases have little or no genetic risk involved. Colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy is a widely used diagnosis method for colon cancer. However, introduction of machine learning to analyze the images from colonoscopy enhanced the detection accuracy especially in an early stage. It is possible to reduce colorectal cancer deaths by 60% with screening.

Machine learning, especially Deep Learning, has shown significant success over processing medical images and detecting cancers. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are deep learning algorithms that are very powerful for the analysis of images. There are many pretrained models available that are trained with millions of images to classify thousands of different classes. Using transfer learning techniques, we can use those models for image segmentation by tuning with our dataset.  

ImageNet is one of the largest datasets used for image classification and object detection with more than 14 million annotated images according to the WordNet hierarchy. Various CNN models were trained on this dataset for object detection from an image. VGG16, VGG19, ResNet50V2, InceptionV3 and Xception are well known CNN models that were trained with more than millions of images from ImageNet. In this thesis, we will observe the performance of five individual Deep CNN models in terms of identifying colon cancer from the colonoscopy images. Furthermore, a fusion model will be proposed that will outrun the accuracy of individual models.

## Result
All the model’s performance observed throughout this thesis are being summarized in Table 4.10. We can state for sure that fusion models have shown greater performance compared to the individual models. However, it seems data overfitting occurs while fusion models are trained. As the dataset used in this thesis consists of only 625 images for each class, which is not a significant number of images in terms of training a deep neural network. Nonetheless, both ResNet50V2 and InceptionResNetV2 with VGG16 have given 94.60% testing accuracy with fine-tuning. More diverse datasets with larger numbers of images would have surely improved these two model’s performances.

